When a Sprite is a Coke

Why copycats get bigger tips

How ordering with others can ruin your meal

Independence with a side of cranberry sauce

When conservatives like generous welfare policies and liberals like stringent ones

Why hurricanes influence baby names

Coolidge . . . The Goldilocks Effect

What cockroaches can teach us about motivation

Why others make us faster runners but worse parallel parkers

Why favorites are more likely to quit

In fact, looking across all domains of our lives, there is only one place we don’t seem to see social influence.
Ourselves.

Take as much time as you need to read the list——Reckless, Furniture, Conceited, Corner, Aloof, Stapler, and Stubborn.

Which breakfast cereal to buy, movie to see, or place to have lunch

Whether the candidate’s policy stance matches your own

While various idiosyncratic reasons may come to mind, in general, they all point in the same direction: you.

The notion that our choices are driven by our own personal thoughts and opinions seems so obvious that it is not even worth mentioning.

Without our realizing it, others have a huge influence on almost every aspect of life.1

Social influence affects the products people buy, health plans they choose, grades they get in school, and careers they follow.

It shapes whether people save for retirement, invest in the stock market, donate money, join a fraternity, save energy, or adopt new innovations.

social influence—the way others affect our behavior

Ferrari and Maserati have dealerships nearby; lunch at one of the high-end restaurants can run close to $200 per person.

Looking for BMWs was like hunting for Easter eggs. There was no surefire way to know where to find them, so I relied on a little intuition and a lot of luck.

I slowly biked up and down different streets, scanning cars for the telltale shape and logo.

Dentists tend to drive nice cars, so why not do a quick loop of the parking lot.

Every time I found a BMW, I reached into my messenger bag, pulled out a piece of paper, and gingerly tucked it under one of the windshield wipers.

These weren’t coupons for body shops or advertisements for auto detailing.

Just a bunch of random coupons and a furniture company catalog.

The next day my optimism was tempered with caution.

I sauntered by the mailbox and peeked inside.

By the third day a feeling of dread accompanied the mail.

They were keenly aware that car-buying decisions were affected by what friends thought and whether cool or high-status people drove the car.

But when it came to turn that same microscope on their own BMW purchase, poof! Social influence vanished.

Whether buying clothes, voting on political issues, or driving courteously, people recognized that social influence had an impact.

People could see social influence affecting others’ behavior, but not their own.

One possible explanation is social desirability. Maybe people don’t think they’re influenced by others because being influenced is a bad thing.

Society tells us to be ourselves and live above the influence—to avoid being a lemming and going with the herd.

If being influenced is bad, maybe people don’t think they are swayed because they don’t want to see themselves in a negative light.

And when picking out clothes for a formal event, going rogue isn’t usually a positive thing.

Having only babysat and mowed a few lawns, your résumé is not exactly sparkling, but you’re able to snag a part-time position bagging groceries at the local supermarket

You’ve just begun to master the ins and outs of paper and plastic when you run into one of your new coworkers in the break room.

You’ve seen her bagging over in lane seven for a couple weeks now and you can’t help but notice how pretty she is.

About your boss, your respective high schools, and the trick she learned to keep tomatoes from bruising.

Next week you run into her a couple more times.

Soon, you find yourself picking shifts based on when you know she’ll be there.

You start whistling while you work, and eventually, you build up enough courage to ask her out

And two hundred and seven dinners, ninety-two long walks, three vacations, and one short-lived breakup later, you find yourself getting married to the only person you could ever see yourself spending the rest of your life with.

In The Symposium, Plato wrote that humans originally had four legs, four arms, and a head made of two faces

They could walk equally well backward and forward, and so terrible was their might and strength that they threatened the very gods who were supposed to be ruling over them

Some wanted to annihilate the human race—wipe them out forever.

Humans provided gods with various tributes and offerings, so why kill them off entirely?

This would teach them a lesson. It would diminish humanity’s strength and punish humans for their pride.

Tinder swipes may have supplanted love letters and hooking up may have replaced elaborate courtships, but most people still believe that there is a Mr. or Ms. Right out there, waiting to be found.

Like two halves of a circle, or two peas in a pod, someone, somewhere out there will complete you.

If you’ve been unlucky in love, don’t fret: you just haven’t met your soul mate yet.

We are all princes with a glass slipper, searching for that one and only Cinderella whose foot will fit.

But what’s the chance that this person just happened to start bagging groceries at the same time we did? Can all of us be that lucky?

Professor Richard Moreland’s undergraduate personality psychology course at the University of Pittsburgh was like many courses you might have taken in college.

It was held in a large, fan-shaped lecture hall with stadium seating.

The space had close to two hundred seats, filled with mostly freshman and sophomores, with a few juniors and seniors mixed in.

Around half the students were men, half were women, and there was the usual array of jocks and geeks, slackers and go-getters.

None of the four women were particularly distinctive.

Unbeknownst to them, the students in Professor Moreland’s course had been part of an elaborate experiment.

Some people prefer blondes, while others prefer brunettes.

Seeing someone more frequently made people like them more.

Without differential exposure, the four women looked the same.

Familiarity leads to liking.5

Whether considering faces in a college yearbook, advertising messages, made-up words, fruit juices, and even buildings, the more people see something, the more they like it

And while the notion that seeing something more times makes us like it more is intriguing in itself, there is another aspect of mere exposure that makes it even more interesting.

We underestimate how much social influence affects our behavior because we don’t realize it is happening.

He was thinking, perhaps, he would do some skydiving or maybe cross the Atlantic in a sailboat.

He has climbed Mount McKinley, shot the Colorado rapids in a kayak, driven in a demolition derby, and piloted a jet-powered boat—without knowing much about boats.

They thought he was reckless and a bit conceited

But what if I had asked you to remember a different list of words beforehand?

Because when a different set of people was asked to remember words like “adventurous,” “self-confident,” “independent,” and “persistent” before reading about Donald, it changed how they saw him.

The words activated different ideas in people’s minds, which then spilled over to affect their perceptions of him.

Test tubes and microscopes and molecules twisting together to form a double helix.

Laboratories with people in white coats and blackboards filled with chicken-scratch equations that look like a Martian took up calligraphy

Even strangers, or people we may never meet, have a startling impact on our judgments and decisions: our attitudes towards a welfare policy totally shift if we’re told it is supported by Democrats versus Republicans (even though the policy is the same in both cases).

We make riskier decisions because someone patted us on the shoulder.

Just like atoms bouncing off each other, our social interactions are constantly shaping who we are and what we do

Like a magnet, others can attract, but they can also repel

Sometimes we conform, or imitate others around us. But in other cases we diverge, or avoid things because other people are doing them

We avoid blaring our horn in traffic because we don’t want to be one of those people

Invisible Influence brings together these, and dozens of other insights, to shed light on the hidden factors that shape behavior.

This book will address these and related questions as it delves into the myriad ways others affect everything we do

And why social influence makes Harry Potter and other blockbusters hard to predict, even for industry experts.

Why one man’s soda is another man’s pop

How mimicking others can make us better negotiators

Sometimes people jump on the bandwagon and follow others, but just as frequently they jump off once it gets too crowded.

Why skin tone affects school performance and why small green frogs are the counterfeiters of the animal kingdom.

Why modern art might seem grating the first time we see it, but why, after looking at a couple Picassos, Kandinskys are more pleasing on the eye.

Why having other people around makes us faster runners but worse parallel parkers.

It’s tempting to read such research and assume that it doesn’t apply to us: Sure, other people might follow the herd, but not me.

We all think we are alone in a crowd of sheep. But whether we are or not is a different story . . .